So we're getting close to the end of what I want to show you with the database module here.
But before we completely close it out, I wanted to discuss a few other techniques briefly.
One of these techniques that I want to discuss now is about optimizing our database code.
I've intentionally avoided addressing optimization until now because everything else that we've done
was complicated enough.
And our primary focus has been to just get basic things working.
However, once you've got the basic functionality working, it can sometimes make sense to come back
through the code and look for places to optimize or, in my case, here.
I knew that there were certain things that could be optimized right from the start, but it's usually
recommended not to optimize code until you know you need it or until you have the time to do it after
you've prioritized just getting the core functionality actually working.
This is a big mistake that a lot of developers tend to make, in fact.
However, I do want to show you a couple of things.
So for the first item that I want to show you, we can start back here in the extract entity from results
set method.
And let me just remind you, this method is getting called whenever we are retrieving people from the
database.
Those people records that are in the results that have to be converted from a result set back into actual
Java objects.
And this is the method that is primarily responsible for making that happen, right?
So as you see here, when we need to extract people, we're calling this method and then passing in
the prefix of the column names there.
When we need to extract children, it calls the same method extract person, but simply passes in a
different prefix so that it knows which columns to look for in that case.
And then same goes for extracting addresses, right?
So what I want to do here is dig into this method extract person.
And you may recall that part of what we do here for the extracting of a person is we call this utility
method that we wrote called Get Value by Alias.
And what this method is doing is it searches for columns by alias name and then it returns a value for
that column.
So if we jump back over here to Squirrel sequel, just as a reminder, you can see here that for this
result, set that we've got, we've got all these columns parent, ID, parent, first name, parent,
last name, etc. These column names are actually the alias column names, right, which we added in
by using the as keyword right.
And by default, JTBC wasn't able to see these column aliases unless we either reestablished our connection
to the database to tell H2 database to make those column aliases visible as column names or as we chose
to do here.
We created a utility method that could find those column aliases and return their values.
So what I really wanted to look at, though, is how this was implemented because there's room for improvement
here.
So jumping into the get value by alias method, let me just give a quick reminder that basically what
we're doing here is first getting the metadata that's associated with the results set.
And I suggest that we could think of the metadata partially as the data in these first two rows.
It's more than that.
But for our purposes, maybe we can kind of think of it as the data in these first two rows.
So we've got this top row that I was using to depict our column aliases.
And then the second row here, which is the actual column names.
So this is that get metadata can give us information like that.
And then we're asking it to give us the column count of the particular results set that we got.
OK, so we're getting that column count.
Then we're setting up a for loop to start looping over those columns, starting at column one, which
will always be this first column.
And what we're essentially trying to do is we're looping over each of the columns, accessing them by
a column index or by the number, by the column number essentially, and then determining whether that
columns label, which is what JBC calls the column alias, if you will.
Whether that label matches an alias that we're looking for, remember that we're passing in this alias
here.
OK.
So that's this alias.
So we're just looking for the column with any given alias that we might be looking for, such as parent
underscore first underscore name, for example.
Also depicted here parent underscore, first underscore name or any other column alias, for that matter.
So we're looking for those aliases, and if we find a column that matches a particular column alias
that we've passed into this method, we take the column index or the number of the column that has that
alias, and we use that number to retrieve the actual value that is in that particular row.
That's what this method is doing.
So if I state that in another way, let's pretend like we're on the third row of this result set.
And we pass into that method parent first name, then our loop will start on column one and say, is
the column label or column alias for column one parent first name.
If no, then go on to the next column.
So then we get to the next column, which is now Column Index two.
And the question is asked again Is this columns label or column alias equal to parent first name?
In this case, the answer would be yes.
And so then we call that get object and we pass in the current column index, which would be two in
this case.
And the get object method will return the value pointed to in this second column on the current row,
which is John.
OK.
So that's just a quick reminder of what this method was doing.
Now here's the part that can be optimized.
This method is being called for every single column of every single row that we need to convert back
into a Java object.
So if we call, find all and it returns one thousand rows of people.
This get value by alias method is getting called for every single column of every single one of those
rows, and it has to loop over every single column in a particular table until it finds the right column
that we happen to be looking for every single time.
That's kind of inefficient because really, what this loop is primarily doing is it's taking the alias
name and then determining what the column indexes for that particular alias.
OK.
So if we pass in parent last name, we need to determine that parent last name.
If that's the column alias we're looking for, that happens to be the third column or the fifth column
or whatever.
Then once we have the column index, we can call Start, get object pass in that index and then get
the value.
OK, so the primary thing we're doing is we're converting from alias to column index and then from column
index to a value.
OK.
So it's kind of a two step process there.
The thing is, though, for each of these column aliases that we're passing in, once we determine the
column index for that alias, that's never going to change for as long as the program is running.
So wouldn't it be nice if we could simply teach the program to remember, Hey, every time you see an
alias like parent first name and you learn that parent first name is column index to just remember that
so that the next time you see parent first name, you don't need to do all of this looping anymore.
You can just jump straight to column index two and get the value for the current row.
That's the potential optimization that I want to show you how to do.
So the question is, how can we do that?
Well, first, there's a programming pattern that we need to recognize what we're trying to figure out.
How to do here is how we can basically associate a column alias with a column index so that we no longer
have to do this loop.
We'll have to do the loop one time in order to initially make the association between column alias and
column index.
But after that association has been made, maybe we can just look up the column index subsequently and
keep using that.
So can you think of a technique that we have learned throughout this course that would allow us to store
that kind of information and look it up later on?
Very simple technique.
Can you think of what that might be?
All right.
Did you think of it?
OK, so obviously there are a number of ways that you could do this, but probably the most appropriate
way would be to simply use a map, some type of a map, a collection, a map, because maps are designed
to allow us to make associations from key to values, key value pairs, right?
In this case, our key would be the alias.
And then the value could be the column index.
So beyond that, what I really am wanting to show you here is a general technique called caching, where
we can initialize data by executing some type of process that might be rather expensive to do just one
time.
Then we store the result of that process and then subsequently, every time we need to obtain the same
output for the same input, rather than doing that processing again, we can simply look up the data
from, in this case, a map.
Now there are different ways to implement caching, but usually one of the simplest ways is by simply
using a map.
So that's what we're going to do here.
All right.
So here's the thing.
The part of this that's most expensive is this for loop here, and we've got to do that at least one
time.
However, we've embedded the call to get the value by this R-Squared object within the four loop.
And because of the way our stack get object works, this part cannot be cached.
Let me remind you why when we call R-Squared up.
Checked, we're getting the current value for the current column of the current row.
OK, so that can't be cashed, but what we can cash is simply the relationship between a column alias
and the column index.
That part won't ever change, so the values change, but the mapping of column alias to column index
does not.
OK, so that means we need to separate out the retrieval of the value, which is this bit right here
from the rest of this loop.
And let me just be really clear here, this for Loop is doing two things.
Currently, it's allowing us to essentially translate from a column alias to a column index, and then
it's going from the column index to retrieving the actual value of the current row.
So it's kind of combining two things.
So by removing the rest, get object.
Call out of this for loop, we allow the for loop to concentrate on just doing one thing which is translating
from column alias to column index.
And that's the part that is perfect for us to cache because for a given column alias, we will always
get the same column index and so caching can be highly beneficial there.
So do you want to take a moment to see if you can figure out a way to do that?
OK.
Did you did you try it?
All right, so let's see how we can do this together now.
So here's what I'm thinking we could do.
Perhaps we can introduce another integer.
I'm just going to make up a name here, something like found index, and I'm going to initialize it
to maybe zero sum number.
That represents a value that isn't going to be contained within the existing columns.
Recall that results that column indexes start with one.
So zero would be a non-existent column.
OK, so that's the reason why I chose zero.
All right.
So found index of zero.
And then maybe what we can do is something like this.
If we find a match, then we will set found index equal to column index like that.
And then I think we want to remove this return line 156 out of the loop because we've already established
that we don't want that to occur within this loop anymore.
Now, by doing so, it no longer has access to this column index variable because that is out of scope.
Remember, variables that are declared within a for loop only have scope within that loop.
So this column index is no longer existing, and that's one of the reasons why I suggested that we create
another integer called Found Index.
Now, we maybe could also have just declared this column index outside, but I think we would have run
into a couple of other little issues that are more easily solved by just introducing another integer.
Here, I leave it as an exercise to you if you want to see what would happen if you didn't introduce
found index and you just tried to declare the column index outside of the for loop and you just carry
with that line of coding.
So I would just change this to found index like so.
Now let us consider, though, what would happen if there was no alias found.
Currently, when we don't find an alias or a match, we return null.
We still need that to happen.
So how can we allow that to happen under this circumstance?
Well, currently, if no alias is found, then when we get down here to Line 158, found index should
still equal zero, right?
Because the only way found index isn't going to equal zero is if we found a match and we set found index
to something other than zero.
So a found index is zero, then that should return a null.
So I think I just said the code right there, if found index equals zero, then return a null right.
So I think what we can do is just say that programmatically and a little bit more concisely, probably
by simply using a ternary.
So let's see what that would look like.
So if found index equals zero, and here's my if ripe for the ternary, then return null.
Else, return this object.
See how I did that by using a very concise ternary.
All right now, you're probably wondering that's all well and good, but where's this caching thing
going to come into play?
Well, as I said at the beginning, we first needed to get this R-Squared object out of this loop so
that we could then treat this loop as one cohesive block of code that we can now establish some caching
around.
And so I think the first thing I want to try doing here is to extract a method for just this block of
code now.
So I will do an option command M and maybe I will call this method get index for Alias.
All right.
So now we've got a nice, easy method here that takes an alias, plus all this other stuff and returns
an index.
Now it happens to be taking an input of this found index, and I don't think that's appropriate.
So in order to get rid of this, I think what we can simply do here is just to inline this parameter.
In other words, we're creating this integer up here, setting it to zero, then passing it in down
here and then passing it into this call.
But really, this integer is fine simply to be declared down in this method here.
So if we simply put our cursor right here, we can inline this method, which means the idea will analyze
this code and see that we are declaring an initializing this variable right here.
And it will determine because we're enlightening it, that it can do all the same things in this method.
So watch this.
I'll put my cursor right here and then do an option command in for inline and then it asks me if I want
to perform a refactoring, which I do, and then let me resize this so that you can see what's going
on here.
And it gives me a warning about some problems being found parameter initialize or depends on value,
which is not available inside method and cannot be inclined.
Do I want to ignore those problems?
Yes, I do.
So I'm going to click Continue.
And so look what?
It did it remove that last parameter and then it copied.
Is declaration and initialization of the found index down to this method?
Now left this one here, but I'm going to delete that and then I will just really clear in line right
here where we're actually using it like so.
All right.
And now we finally get to do the caching magic here.
So to implement a basic caching mechanism for a simple method that maps an input to an output, in this
case, the word alias to the integer.
All we need to do is simply use a map.
Now here's the thing, though this map cannot be local to this method because any data that we put in
the map would get lost after this method was done.
So the map has to be declared and live beyond this method.
And the other thing is that the basic formula for implementing this caching mechanism would be when
you first enter the method or soon after you enter the method, you want to first ask the map.
Hey, map, do you have a value for alias?
If yes, then get that value and then return it immediately, thereby bypassing whatever more expensive
processing you would have normally done.
Which in our case is looping over all of this.
So we would just skip.
I'll skip over all of this if our map already has an integer associated with this alias.
If, on the other hand, the map does not already have a value and integer associated with the alias,
then we go ahead and run our code like normal.
But when we're done looping over all of this, we store that value in the map and then we return it.
And that's basically it.
So let's see what this will look like.
So the first thing I will do is just go up to the top of this method here and find where our fields
are declared.
And maybe, I don't know, maybe after after these static fields, here I am going to declare a private
map of string because our aliases are strings and those will be the keys to integer.
Now notice I have to use a wrapper integer class.
I can't use end because maps don't allow primitives.
OK.
And let me import the map class and then give this field the name.
And I don't know, maybe alias column index map and I'm going to go ahead and initialize it right here,
and I'm going to use a hash map for this.
Because, as you may recall, the hash map is generally speaking, the fastest type of map for doing
lookups, and we don't care about storing the entries into this map in any particular order.
None of that's going to matter for us.
So hash map is the most typical map implementation that would be used, especially in this case, but
in most cases, really.
All right.
So then we'll come back down here to our new method.
OK, so now that we've got that map, let's see what this might look like.
So I said the first thing you would typically do is to perform a lookup with the map.
So let's see what that might look like.
So what did I call that alias column index map dot get?
And then pass in the alias and then let's capture the output of that.
And I guess let's go ahead and call it found index.
Now I know that we already have this one down here, so I guess I'm going to delete that one now.
And so now maybe we can just surround this entire for loop with a conditional.
So I'll do an option command T and surrounded with a conditional like.
So and say something like if found index is null, because that's what it would be if there was no value
stored in this map mapping alias to a number, then we would get a null value out.
So if it's null, then we're going to go ahead and do all of this.
Oh, and one more thing that I see here, if we do find a match, we can go ahead and stop the loop,
right?
So we can just do a break.
We don't need to keep looping.
Once we find a positive match.
We can stop this loop from occurring at that point.
So we can do that with break right then will want to store the found index back inside of the map so
we can do that on the very next line.
So we'll do a Alias Column Index map that put Alias Comma Found Index.
All right.
So once we find that match, we're going to store it back into the map so that the next time we come
in to this method, if we're passing in that same alias, we'll get the index for that alias right away.
And then finally, we will return the found index.
So now consider the next time we need to do a look up for an alias that we already stored in this map,
such as parent underscore first underscore name.
If that was already stored in here, then we would get the found index for it.
Therefore, the found index would not be null.
Therefore, we would skip over all of this and then we'd just return the value so we'd bypass all this
looping that's currently going on.
So I think that should be it.
So let's go ahead and rerun all of our test and see if we broke anything.
Now let me remember to get out of the database, which I always forget to do.
All right.
And jump over to the tests and jump up to the top and just run all the tests.
All right, we've got one failed test can find all.
Oh, interesting, cannot invoke integers and value because found index is null.
Let's see what led us to that, so I'm going to click here at the top of the Stack Trace Return Found
Index.
So this is our new method.
OK.
And the problem here is simply that our signature for this newly created method of get indexed for Alias
is expecting to return a primitive.
And we do have the possibility of simply returning a null which cannot be expressed with a primitive.
So we just need to change this return type from a primitive integer to a wrapper integer.
OK.
Like so and so now, let's rerun the tests again.
Oh, wow, and we still have one failed test, let's see, still with the find all.
Let's see, so can't invoke in value, because the return value of jet index for Alias is null, the
return value forget index for Alias is null.
So I'm going to click here on the top of the stack trace line 156.
OK, so we have the same problem up here now.
We're returning a null from this method.
However, this value here is still primitive and we can't do that.
Yes.
So I actually forgot that the way that I was going to interpret null appear was to say that if the found
index was zero, then return a null.
But now down in the actual method, I'm simply returning a null so we could do this in either way.
We could have this method return zero if it doesn't find anything in which case we don't need to change
anything here and this would all work.
Or we can let this method go ahead and return null as it is currently doing.
In which case we would need to change this to a wrapper integer and then change what we're testing for.
So actually, I'll tell you what I think what we can do is we can actually put this back to end and
then we can use a slightly different method here to get the value.
So there's an alternative method here.
Instead of get, we could call, get or default, which allows us to pass in a default value.
So let's see if we use that method getter default.
And now we can say if there wasn't anything found, then we'll return a zero like so and we did learn
this when we were learning about maps in the collections module.
Now that means we need to change what we're testing for down here because now found index will never
be null.
Instead, it will be zero.
So we just want to test if found index zero, then do all of these things.
And then if we still don't find a match, we will return a zero.
And now this will work because we won't ever be returning a null from this method.
It'll be a zero and everything else is good.
And for that matter, actually, now with that change that we just made, I didn't actually even need
to change this to a primitive.
I could have left it as a wrapper, but it doesn't matter, really.
All right, so let's try that one more time.
There we go, and now we have everything passing, and I just want to take this moment to underscore
yet again.
Do you guys appreciate and see the power of having these tests that we can run?
They are really saving us from these kinds of small, simple mistakes that even I as a professional
developer can easily make.
Any any developer will make these mistakes from time to time.
And these are the kinds of mistakes, though, where bugs come from in in professional code, and a
lot of them can be cut if you have a decent set of tests.
And honestly, I've left out still a lot of tests that I knew we could have written in the interest
of time.
But even just this set of tests that we have now have already cut so many issues throughout this module.
So I hope you can really appreciate just how powerful a technique it is to use TDD and have a decent
set of tests that we can run to kind of provide a safety net for us.
Really, that's that's what they're doing.
All right.
So we got that working.
And so now just to recap what's going to happen from this point forward?
Is that this code will run a little bit faster now?
Unfortunately, we don't have any benchmarks, but I mean, I think you can just intellectually see
that now.
We only need to run these loops for the very first time that we ever are trying to retrieve a value
for an alias.
And after we've retrieved that value for that particular alias, the subsequent times that we have to
look that up, which would be for every subsequent row, any time we're doing any kind of look up will
run considerably faster.
So this is one really nice optimization where we're caching.
All right.
So I'm going to go ahead and close this lesson.
And in the next lesson, I want to talk about at least one other optimization that we could make to
this code as well.
OK.
So I will see you in the next one.